Design Document for AP Computer Science A Sudoku Project

Program Overview
The program uses a recursive algorithm to create a sudoku grid, which it then prints.
The algorithm find random numbers which are valid given currently filled squares in the grid. It then fills a square that it is on, and moves on. If/when the algorithm finds that no number passes the check, it undoes steps until it reaches a step where not every possible next step has been tried, and it is thus guaranteed to finish generating a full sudoku.
It has 2 methods: pathfinder, which is the recursive method that fills the grid by selecting numbers and validating them using valid to determine whether to continue or not, and valid, which determines the validity of a number in its slot.

Data Structures
The program uses a 2d array to store the sudoku numbers and then to print them
The program uses an arraylist to select numbers and shuffle them using collections.shuffle in order to pick random numbers to continue the program

Algorithm Design
The program generates a Sudoku object, then prints it
The Sudoku object is generated by the recursive method pathfinder. Pathfinder works by going through the rows and columns (fills 1 row, then moves column) and then finishing when the column reaches 9 (out of bounds)
It selects random numbers by shuffling an ArrayList of numbers 1 - 9 and then selecting them one by one to be checked for validity by the method valid (explained next).
It begins by setting the slot to one of the numbers. Then, it checks for validity. If it is valid, it is called again, with 1 more to the row, and it does the same thing again and again, calling it with 1 more to the row until it is done.
If it ever fails, it sets the number back to zero and moves on to the next in the arraylist
If all numbers fail, it returns false and the last iteration of pathfinder will select a new number (and if that has gone through all numbers, it goes to the previous iteration, and so on and so on)
I don’t really know a good way to explain it, but the way I think of it is that it is a branching system that basically picks random numbers, and when they fail, it makes a new branch at the last failure point where not all numbers have been checked. Visually, this could be represented as a tree where it explores all possibilities one by one.
Not sure if this has to be here, but toString works by using a nested for loop to build a string. The for loops run once for each slot in the 2d array, and on each slot where the counter % 3 = 0 (above and to the right of each box), it adds borders to the string. It has extra borders after the inner and outer loops end because the % 3 thing doesn’t do that
Methods
This has already been explained, but the key methods are the constructor, pathfinder, valid, and toString
Constructor: it is a constructor. It fills the grid with zeroes, then calls pathfinder to fill it.
Pathfinder: creates the actual content of the sudoku using the recursive method
Valid: checks for the validity of chosen numbers
toString: a toString method that prints the array

Testing Plan
I first created the 2d array, and made the toString method so I could test it because it was easy to do
Then, I created the validation method, which I tested by hardcoding a 2d array with values and trying it
Finally, I created pathfinder, which I tested by simply using it since the other 2 methods required for testing were already there

Challenges and Solutions
The main challenge was figuring it out. I knew that there had to be a better way than to restart at the beginning every time a failure occurred, but I had no clue where to start. I tried an idea I came up with on the day it was assigned where I used layered arraylists to try to do it without validation, but I soon learned that it was impossible to do so. Stuck, I rested during break, occasionally thinking about the problem. It was when I was playing a game (we were losing badly and couldn’t figure the game out so we just started talking about random stuff) with Noah Jin who I think is in your other period that we remembered about recursive algorithms.We knew that we would want to check all possible iterations, and we then realized that recursive algorithms essentially “save” all iterations of the method, meaning that instead of randomly checking from the beginning every time, we could randomly check from the last iteration that did not check every path, giving us perfect coverage. 
